[LIGHT MUSIC]
>> Solheimar is an eco-village
or one of the first in the world
to get that stamp.
And when other eco-villages
in the world are lecturing,
they always mention
Solheimar, the first, 1930s,
then came others.
We are about 100 people
living in Solheimar today.
40 are people with disabilities.
That's why we are
here now today.
We have the greenhouses.
We have our small
permaculture garden.
That was a project
that started 2012.
And because I have a little
bit of green fingers,
the manager decided
to send me to England.
It was a course of two weeks
and really just all in, all in.
I got so inspired by
all the knowledge they
have there and how and what.
And think about the sun and the
water, think about the soil,
think about the person next
to you, the social way just
to grow.
And I came back full of ideas.
So this is the troll
of the troll garden.
And the name we got from--
everybody in
Solheimar helped out
choosing a name for this garden.
And the garden is the troll
garden because of this troll,
which is standing here.
So this is our
permaculture garden.
We didn't want to go too
close to the road, of course.
And then everything stops.
It's the gate.
This is the gate.
Welcome.
Come on into our troll garden.
So, as you can see, some of the
beds here are well raised up.
That was because some residents
said they can't bend over a lot.
So we took that away.
Now everybody can
enjoy the garden.
Even a wheelchair can
come and help out.
And you don't have to do a lot.
I mean, just be a
part of the garden.
Here, we fill this up with
the tree stumps like this.
And so they are rotting
slowly and giving heat.
So we have a longer period
of time for growing.
After I went to the course in
England, I just designed it.
I drew it.
And I didn't want anything to
be like this so I did paths.
And I tried to think about
people with special needs,
wheelchairs.
That everybody can
go around the garden
and enjoy it, and
without too much effort.
It's just a perfect
way, I think.
Be creative about
what you're doing.
I mean, mix trees and flowers
and edible stuff together.
Here we have--
Here we have a worm compost.
Show people how the worms are
doing, how they are working.
We use things like this
cardboard or paper.
Then how the compost looks
after some months working.
The garden is not just
about growing this and that.
It's also about
making people smile.
What?
Is that a troll over there?
What is that?
It's a picture of a tree or
a bird bath or a small pond.
These things are so nice
because people go in the garden.
And they always go out smiling
and eating if everything's OK.
That's a really beautiful thing
about Solheimar-- trying out
things.
Does this work or
does this not work?
We have spiral.
And the spiral is, of course,
really an important thing
in growing.
Because at the highest
point there's a lot of sun
and the soil is dry.
But then you go a little
more down and at the bottom
it's wet soil.
This is the sunny
side this year.
We have a pond over there.
The wet soil up to here, then
it's going to get much drier.
So if you come
with me, I'm going
to show you something
really interesting.
We do not use any
chemicals to get growth
in the soil or anything.
But at the moment, we are in
a rhubarb part of the garden.
But just look at this.
Look at this.
Have you seen
anything like this?
So beautiful.
Everything grows here.
This is really nice.
So absolutely the
way it should be.
Before we started
this garden here,
maybe 15 years before,
this was a potato garden.
And it was a heated-up
potato garden.
There were pipes underneath.
So that's a long time ago.
And I didn't realize that
until I was digging here
and I got a pipe
like these pipes.
Now this, this is just
one of the pipes that
was lying here all around to
heat up the garden in the winter
to get started a
little bit earlier,
getting the frost
out of the soil.
Every day in Solheimar,
we have a morning meeting
where everybody who's
working and live in Solheimar
come together.
And we start the day
by holding hands.
And at 9 o'clock, the bells
ring, the church bell.
So it's like a moment of
just relaxing and getting
ready for the day.
[BELLS RINGING]
[NON-ENGLISH SPEECH]
>> When the bell has rung,
we just say good morning,
góðan daginn, and someone
says what day it is today.
Then we ask, is there
any announcements
anybody want to do.
Sometimes it takes 5
minutes, sometimes 10.
But at the end of
the day, we all
take hands again and sing
a song, Solheimar a song,
short but beautiful.
And then everybody knows
what's going on that day.
Nobody is surprised
about anything.
[NON-ENGLISH SINGING]
>> Then we have this small
community area here where we can
sit down, talk about
what we're doing,
have a sing along with
the scouts, light a fire.
We have this nice fire
pit like this and heat up.
Sometimes we need
some heat in here.
Coming together in a garden
is like a healing process.
It's not all about
growing something.
It's more about communication
in the garden itself.
We're talking about
something or having
a small campfire in the garden,
it's so healing and relaxing.
[LIGHT MUSIC]
There are strawberries, the
wild strawberries growing here,
and all kinds of berries.
We have apple trees now
growing in Solheimar.
We haven't had the fruit
yet, but it is there.
But it takes more time.
I mean, I would say about
maybe three years from now
because they've been
here for a while.
So then we are going
to get small trees.
And the gardening
society of Iceland
decided to make a
Solheimar a gene bank
for apple trees in the country.
So we're going to put all
the types of apple trees,
and there are lots in Solheimar.
So they can come every
year or second year
or whatever to see
how they are doing.
And they bring the trees,
but we to get the fruits
when they come.
Everything we do here belongs
to the people in Solheimar.
We don't sell anything.
It's just for the
community to use.
We have a lot of stuff
in the greenhouses,
like cucumbers and
paprika and tomatoes.
Mostly tomatoes.
Many kinds of tomatoes also.
[LIGHT MUSIC]
Our hopes in Solheimar are to
expand the permaculture way.
We have a lot of
areas in Solheimar.
We still have to put trees down.
Yeah, there's so
many possibilities.
And in Solheimar,
all the villages
are so willing to take part
because they see the result.
And sometimes when you go
down in the garden later
in the evening, there
are maybe three people
taking salads for the dinner.
So everybody who
lives in Solheimar
have a free use of the garden.
They can weed.
They can take salads
whenever they want.
It's open for everybody
who lives in Solheimar
to use the garden as they want.
If you're doing the
permaculture way,
you have to realize that
things don't happen tomorrow.
You have to take your time.
It takes a while.
First year, maybe you
look at your site.
Where is the sun and
how is the water going?
And how is the soil, and
are there trees there?
How can you use these
trees to make growth?
And then the next year, you have
a little bit idea about what
happened the year before.
Then you can start
slowly but surely.
And things take time.
I mean, a path through
a garden, make sure
that you're not putting the
path at the best place where
you can grow things.
Make it crooked or
whatever, but make it--
do it alive.
Enjoy it.
Whatever you're doing, enjoy it.
For me, if someone is growing
something in the garden
and he's looking around and
seeing what tree over there,
or it's too much water to
put anything down here,
or this is a sunny
area here, I'm
going to put this, that's
the permaculture way.
You don't have to be
educated to understand
that the flower needs the
sun and she needs the water.
And if the wind is too much,
you move the tree a little bit.
Or you put a tree where the
wind is too much so the salad
or whatever you're growing will
have shelter in the future.
Now, I think you can call
it whatever you like.
For me, it's making food.
I am not a professional gardener
or a professional architect
or whatever, but I
like creating things.
And if I feel that it
helps in our Solheimar
community, this small
garden we have started here
and I feel that
it's helping a lot.
But we are small and we
are in a cold climate.
But we can do it.
We can because we have the
energy and people are strong.
And if they see that--
I mean, just think about it.
We are in the middle
of the Atlantic Ocean.
If the routes between
other countries would stop,
what do we do?
We fish.
Is that enough?
And how are we going to fish?
We don't have the oil,
but we can always grow.
We have this soil.
We have the sun at
least for these times.
We have the sheep and
horses and all that.
So we can survive if we want.
If we really need to, we can.
[LIGHT MUSIC]